INSTALL.md, before:

Mirage has been tested on:

* Debian Squeeze x86_64 and x86_32
* MacOS X 10.6 Snow Leopard x86_64
* MacOS X 10.5 Snow Leopard x86_32

To build it, you must first:

1. Install the basic toolchain
2. Build the tools
3. Build the core libraries

Toolchain
---------

You need to have the following installed and available on your PATH:

* OCaml 3.12.0
* OCamlfind

Debian Squeeze and Ubuntu are still at 3.11, but you can grab the latest
packages from: http://ocaml.debian.net/debian/ocaml-3.12.0/

Then: apt-get install ocaml-findlib camlp4-extra ocaml-native-compilers

Tools
-----

This installs the build tools and syntax extensions into the install PREFIX.

    make PREFIX=<location> tools

The tools include the `mir-unix` and `mir-xen` build wrappers and the
MPL protocol specification meta-compiler.

Libraries
---------

    make && make install

This will build the OCaml libraries and the Xen custom runtime, if
appropriate for the build platform.  You require 64-bit Linux to
compile up Xen binaries (32-bit will not work).

Build an application
--------------------

Mirage uses `ocamlbuild` to build applications, with the `mir`
script providing a thin wrapper to install a custom plugin to deal
with the various backends.

To try out basic functionality, do `cd tests/basic/sleep`.

Build a UNIX binary:

    mir-unix sleep.bin

output will be in `_build/sleep.bin`

Build a Xen kernel:

    mir-xen sleep.xen

output will be in `_build/sleep.{bin,xen}`, and you can boot it up
in Xen with a config file like:

    $ cat > sleep.cfg
    name="sleep"
    memory=1024
    kernel="_build/sleep.bin"
    <control-d>
    $ sudo xm create -c sleep.cfg

This runs a simple interlocking sleep test which tries out the
console and timer support for the various supported platforms.

Coming soon: I/O :-)

Commit message:

update INSTALL.md for networking. Note that the direct examples wont work just yet since the interface IP configuration stuff isn't in yet

INSTALL.md, after:

Mirage has been tested on:

* Debian Squeeze x86_64 and x86_32
* MacOS X 10.6 Snow Leopard x86_64
* MacOS X 10.5 Snow Leopard x86_32

To build it, you must first:

1. Install the basic toolchain
2. Build the tools
3. Build the core libraries

Toolchain
---------

You need to have the following installed and available on your PATH:

* OCaml 3.12.0
* OCamlfind

Debian Squeeze and Ubuntu are still at 3.11, but you can grab the latest
packages from: http://ocaml.debian.net/debian/ocaml-3.12.0/

Then: apt-get install ocaml-findlib camlp4-extra ocaml-native-compilers

Tools
-----

This installs the build tools and syntax extensions into the install PREFIX.

    make PREFIX=<location> tools

The tools include the `mir-unix-*` and `mir-xen` build wrappers and the
MPL protocol specification meta-compiler.

Libraries
---------

    make && make install

This will build the OCaml libraries and the Xen custom runtime, if
appropriate for the build platform.  You require 64-bit Linux to
compile up Xen binaries (32-bit will not work).

Build an application
--------------------

Mirage uses `ocamlbuild` to build applications, with the `mir`
script providing a thin wrapper to install a custom plugin to deal
with the various backends.

To try out basic functionality, do `cd tests/basic/sleep`.

Build a UNIX binary:

    mir-unix-direct sleep.bin

output will be in `_build/sleep.bin`

Build a Xen kernel:

    mir-xen sleep.xen

output will be in `_build/sleep.{bin,xen}`, and you can boot it up
in Xen with a config file like:

    $ cat > sleep.cfg
    name="sleep"
    memory=1024
    kernel="_build/sleep.bin"
    <control-d>
    $ sudo xm create -c sleep.cfg

This runs a simple interlocking sleep test which tries out the
console and timer support for the various supported platforms.

Network
-------

Mirage networking is present in the Net module and can compile in two modes: 

A 'direct' mode that works from the Ethernet layer (the OS.Ethif
module). On Xen, this is the virtual Ethernet driver, and on UNIX
this requires the `tuntap` interface.

A subset of the Net modules (Flow and Manager) are available in
'socket' mode under UNIX. This maps the Flow interface onto POSIX
sockets, enabling easy comparison with normal kernels.

There are two echo servers available in:

* `tests/net/flow` 
* `tests/net/flow_udp`

You can compile these with:

    $ mir-unix-socket echo.bin
    $ ./_build/echo.bin

    $ mir-unix-direct echo.bin
    $ sudo ./_build/echo.bin

    $ mir-xen echo.xen
    # boot the kernel in ./_build/echo.xen
